The Joe Rogan experience.
So you brought up MK ultra and ultra was a government program
run by the central intelligence. 80, uh,
agency originally started as something called Bluebird in
19 48, 49 morphed into artichoke.
And then in 1952 became MK ultra. It was a mind control program,
a brainwashing program.
The CIA was trying to learn how to control people's behavior
without their knowledge. Now,
this is all came out in Senate and congressional hearings in the seventies.
It was exposed, but nobody knew about it until 1974,
when Seymour Hersh,
the New York times reporter reported on the front page of the paper. So, um,
their main objective was to commit or to create what they call a hypno program,
assassins, people who would kill OnCommand, uh,
popularly known as mutt Manchurian candidates.
After a book that was written in 1962 and later became a movie and then a movie
again, uh, the people would be through drugs and hypnotism.
The objective was to get people to go and come in an act of murder
against their moral code and have no memory of their
programming, uh, and B amnesia, even of the act after the fact often,
uh, that was just one, that was our main goal,
but they were also trying to create couriers people, you know,
military people that they could implant messages, send them, you know,
across dangerous areas. Whether at that time it was the Vietnam war,
uh, and deliver messages and then have them wipe from their,
their memory in case they were captured, uh, they had all kinds of objectives.
So Roger Smith was, um,
supervising Manson when he became exactly what he was
able to do.
Exactly what the MK ultra program had been trying to create and do for at that
point about 15,
17 years when it was all exposed in the seventies.
And there were these hearings first, um,
the Rockefeller commission hearings and the church hearings, and then finally,
uh, senators, Ted Kennedy and Daniel anyway held hearings. Um,
the CIA admitted that they had done this, but they,
no one would say exactly what they did.
All the records had been destroyed when the two people who ran it,
Richard Helms,
who had become the director of the CIA in the sixties and Dr. Sydney Gottlieb,
who was kind of the mad scientist who, um,
had supervised all the, all the, they had safe houses in San Francisco,
New York, Los Angeles,
where they would experiment on people that were Lord and into these, um,
apartments and houses that were either look,
look like profiteroles or hippie communes or whatever. And, um,
the people who were working at the Haight Ashbury free medical clinic that was
run by another Smith, which makes it a little confusing.
But Dr. Smith who founded it, um,
he had given an office to a scientist named jolly west Lewis,
J west, who, um, was when,
when the hearings occurred in the seventies,
identified as a top MK ultra researcher. He was an academic,
uh, come out of the military,
had been at the Oklahoma university of Oklahoma university,
university of Oklahoma, sorry. And then UCLA running the psychiatric divisions,
he denied ever being involved in MK ultra. And this was one of the moments,
I think it was 2001, when, you know,
things really kind of shocked the course of my
reporting was I learned that west had been at the same place that Manson
was in the hate and the summer that Manson became exactly what the CIA was
trying to create.
And I knew actually I interviewed west about seven years before for
a story I did about celebrity stalkers,
the people who were obsessed with stars and then only to kill them or try to
kill them. And he was an expert in violence, hypnotism brainwashing,
and he was the chair of the psychiatry department at UCLA at that point, uh,
he was dead when his name came up in the Manson story.
And there wasn't a lot of, I mean, I guess there was a lot of Google then,
or a little bit, but when I did a little research,
I found out that there had been these allegations that he'd been involved in MK
ultra. He always denied it. He was never prosecuted, never even investigated.
He went to his grave,
threatening to Sue anybody that said he would have anything to do with this kind
of a program, again, through another long story.
But I got access to his files, which had been left at UCLA, uh,
and never, they had never been processed when I called and went.
When I made the request, it took him two or three months to process the papers.
I went through them through the whole summer looking for a needle in a haystack
and it was intuition gut.
I just thought there might be something there and sure enough,
I eventually found it.
It was correspondence between jolly west and Sydney Gottlieb.
The doctor that ran and Carol ultra beginning in 1953,
about Kentucky conducting experiments on people without their knowledge,
to get them to, uh, have a near fix, uh,
amnesia of the acts, uh, after they were programmed and, uh,
everything that he had been accused of and denied.
He did not only did he do it,
he created the blueprint for the whole program with Gottlieb. Uh,
the fact that all these kind of, uh,
interesting research programs merged at the hate at the
clinic and then Manson came out of it with the power to do exactly
what then Kyle too, I've been trying to create for up to that point,
I thought was worth investigating further.
And that's why I kept going and going and going.
They did a lot of crazy back then. Are you aware of operation midnight,
midnight.
That those were the safe houses in San Francisco? Well,
that was the brothel version.
Of it where they, they lured.
These Johns into these brothels and then dose them up with LSD and studied them.
Yeah, George Hunter.
White was the head CIA guy and he would sit behind a two way or one way
mirror and watch the Johns would be dosed with LSD.
They tried aerosols or just drinks, different things,
and then they would study their behaviors and aerosols. Yeah. Aerosol sprays.
Yeah. Yeah. But.
That would get the prostitutes too then. No, no, the.
Prostitutes would get them in there and then they go to the bathroom or
something.
Or did they in the bathroom again.
The problem is the records are so scant because Helms order Gottlieb
to destroy all the records in 1973, when the two men left the agency.
And the only reason anybody ever discovered that it existed was a whistleblower.
Somebody who used to work for the state department who remembered that there
were records in a warehouse and they were just financial records from the
beginning of the program.
And 52 until the end and the possible end in 73.
And, uh,
it was just financial records of where research took place.
How much was spent, what kind of equipment was bought,
but nothing about the content.
The guy that found that ended up testifying to Congress and working with Seymour
hers to expose it was named John Marks.
He wrote the first book about MK alter that came out in the mid to late
seventies, called the search for the Manchurian candidate.
And after he wrote his book, he never S you know, he spoke, uh,
did a little bit of a tour and then retreated into obscurity and never
would do an interview again until I approached him in the early two
thousands. And when I told him what I had, what I had found in west files,
these documents, he agreed to meet with me at his townhouse in Washington, DC.
And he told me, he said,
the reason I stopped talking or writing about this was people were camping out
on my front lawn, you know, telling me that they'd been victims of MKR altar.
He goes, I couldn't go anywhere.
And my whole life became crazy because everybody thought that they were subject
to this because nobody knew they did these drug tests on prisoners,
hospital patients, Johns hippies,
people that had no idea that this was going on for 25 years.
So Mark's became the authority.
So he had never given an interview until he met with me.
And when he looked at my documents at that point,
I think I had about 10 or 12 or 15 pages that grew eventually because I
kept going back to the files and getting more.
He said it was the most unredacted, uncensored,
uh, account of what the real objectives were and what was really being done.
He had never, he said, if I had had that,
my whole book would have been different. Um,
so that's one of the problems about saying, well, how much did they do?
Or how far did they go? There's barely any record.
And that's another reason it took me 20 years. Cause I trying to find out, uh,
whether or not Wes had actually interacted with Manson and where the girls,
I mean, I knew he was in the same facility.
I knew that everybody that worked there because I interviewed everybody that was
alive,
most of them were still alive back in the late nineties and early two thousands.
When I did this, they all said, oh yeah, Charlie was, you know,
we knew it was Charlie and the girls they'd come in every day or every few days
to see Roger and Wes was there recruiting subjects.
Now west, while he was there,
that summer had opened something called what he called the Haight Ashbury
project. And in his, uh,
correspondence and papers that I found, he called it a, uh,
laboratory disguise as a hippie crash pad. And, uh,
and just like the operation midnight, uh, safe house,
they call them safe houses, which were disguised as, uh, you know,
bordellos and that type of thing or brothels. These,
this was an apartment that was decked out.
Or as he called it tricked out to look like a communal hippy place,
he had six graduate students and I have in his letters to them before they came
to work in this, he goes, grow your hair long, wear jeans,
dress like hippies and lore people in there.
So they ran that for the summer of 67.
And Wes was getting people from that Haight Ashbury free medical clinic on
Clayton street and sending them around the corner to Frederick street, uh,
to participate in that God Lord. And, um,
I got the diaries of some of the graduate students who were there and they all
in these diaries said,
we have no idea what we're really supposed to be doing here.
We feel like this whole thing is a cover for something else.
What does jolly want? Why is he making us bring these people in? So, uh,
and.
Doing that to graduate students,
telling them to bring people in and drug them up, imagine telling them, well.
Some of the mine apartment, I'm sure they, it, because they were also, you know.
Encouraged to use LSD. Sure.
I mean, imagine being a graduate student,
and this is your project on people, I mean, that sets up.
Even if you leave that program and go on to do legitimate work,
the ethical foundations of your career are set up in such a strange way.
You're manipulating people against their knowledge.
Well, they didn't know who they were doing it for.
That's why they were always questioning it. So, um, you know,
I don't know how I found one or two of them after.
And they were very careful talking to me.
I'm sure they felt like they were going to go to jail. Well, that's the thing.
Yeah. Um, if any of these experiments or whatever was going on,
resulted in a death, there's no statute of limitations on murder, right? Um,
I mean,
that's one of the biggest disappointments of my book is that people like west
aren't alive to answer for that, to answer to this.
And it was really frustrating for me because again,
his name was on the front page of the New York times in 1977,
they had the major hearings about MK ultra.
And it identified him as the head of the psychiatry department at UCLA,
very prominent doctor or researcher. And he said he had nothing to do with that.
He'd never used LSD on humans. And he wouldn't, uh,
he said they had asked him and he said, no. Um,
I have all these letters between him and the guy who was running the program,
describing how they're going to do it,
hide it from his colleagues when he started it,
he started at Lackland air force base. He was, uh,
running the psychiatry department at the hospital there in 1952 when he was
there running that hospital.
That's when he started his experiments on prisoners, human subjects,
and one letter to Gottlieb, he says,
eventually we have to take these experiments out into the field. Oh, Jesus.
Exactly. What does that mean? Well,
if you're having gotten through a chapter 11, yet you.
Haven't gotten to the Jimmy shaver case a.
Year after maybe Jamie did a year after, uh,
west contracted with, um, the CIA to do these experiments.
July 4th, 1954,
a three-year-old girl went missing from the parking lot of a bar,
uh, at about 11 or 12 at night. And her parents, it was a heat wave.
They couldn't sleep. They went to the bar, they brought their two kids.
They let them play in the parking lot at midnight. Uh,
the little girl disappeared.
They organized a search party about three or four hours later. They, uh,
went to a gravel pit and, uh,
two arrow to airmen had called or two
itinerant guys had called the police, the local sharer and said,
there's a guy here that wandered out of the brush with scratches
and blood, no shirt. And he doesn't know how he got here, who he is.
Uh, the police came, his name was Jimmy shaver. He was an airman.
They did a search and they found a little girl's body, not too far away.
And she had been raped and murdered, uh,
by this guy who had no memory of doing it. The guy had no history of,
uh, violence. Um,
he had a couple of kids and he was a flight instructor at the school.
He'd been in the military for a number of years.
I think it was in his early thirties. Well guess who became his, uh,
psychiatrist in preparation for the trial jolly west who inserted
himself into the case and then extracted his memory from him using sodium.
Pentothal where he admitted to the, the murder.
Now in the context of what we found out west was doing and what his objectives
were at that same time,
it raises huge questions about this was an experiment gone wrong.
You know,
that he was part of one of these experiments at Lackland air force base,
where he was signed up, uh, during the trial,
it came out that he had had treatment for severe migraines,
experimental treatment at Lackland. Um, that's another, you know,
a smaller sub chapter in the book, but.
Does it describe what kind of experimental treatment he received? No.
No, because nobody, I mean, I have all the testimony.
There was actually a re a trial or retrial and sentencing,
and every time it came up, it was really frustrating because he never testified.
So they w it was either his wife or his mother who would talk about it.
It was mostly his mother saying, well,
all I knew was they wanted him to be involved in this two year study, uh,
to try to relieve his, his migraines. He would have such horrible migraines.
He would put his head in buckets of ice water. Um,
the people who described and countering him that night when he was arrested and
immediately taken out of the Sheriff's custody by the military police and
brought to Lachlan, and then back to the sheriffs, um, he was in a trance.
Uh, the, the doctors tested him for alcohol because they thought, well,
maybe he's drunk. He had no, uh, just a little bit of alcohol in his system,
but he wasn't drunk. And, um, after the fact,
they found out that he had w I mean,
I don't want to get into this cause it's really getting into the weeds,
but he had hallucinated, uh,
that this little girl was a cousin who sexually abused him as a child.
And he was trying to kill her. Her name was Beth rainbow.
All this stuff came out of the trial. Um,
jolly west in 1955 sent, uh,
a report to Sydney Gottlieb, which nobody had seen.
And it was another document I found in his files announcing that he had learned
how to,
or develop the technology to remove true memories
and replace them with false memories and a human subject without their
knowledge, which was one of the main goals,
the biggest goals of the MK ultra program. And again, when the CIA,
when they had the hearings in the seventies,
the CIA said nothing was successful. Everything we try was a failure,
it was a waste of money. We shouldn't have done it, uh,
and not, not just be,
but most experts think that that was a cover that they didn't want to admit that
they had developed these technologies that were effective.
They also claim that they had released everything they had.
I found the same report where west said that he had learned how to replace true
memories with false ones without a person's awareness. Uh,
but they had removed that from the report and then release it to Congress.
So that's a crime right there, you know? Um, so there's a lot of that stuff, uh,
in the book.
So the speculation is that this guy through these experimental treatments,
that they had dosed him up with LSD and experimented using these
MK ultra techniques and did that to him and induce some
sort of.
Well, this is speculation. I'll there for this. Uh,
the guy had no history of violence, uh, never been arrested,
a stellar upstanding citizen.
His only problem was he had these horrible headaches.
All of a sudden he shows up by a small girl's body who had been brutally
murdered with no memory of doing it a year earlier,
Dr. West,
who became a psychiatrist within a week or two possibly had
experiences with them before, but there was no record. Uh,
when I tried to get the record from the medical center at, um,
Lachlan, his file that his name was shaver.
I think it was S a to S I was
missing. So were shaver would have been in the medical records. It was gone.
So I couldn't find out whether he had actually participated in any kind of
experimental program there.
So is the speculation. And again,
this is speculation that he did commit the crime,
that he was somehow or another induced into committing this crime.
Okay. Yeah. And again, this is speculation. It's completely circumstantial.
The objective was to get people who would go out and do things,
not even necessarily kill that. That was the ultimate goal,
but to do things against their will against their moral code. Right. But.
How would they know that this child would be there?
How would they know if she wasn't targeted?
So was it just that they'd put it into his head to go do.
Something, anyone something clicked and went wrong.
So it wasn't a precise thing. No, no, no. Um,
nobody really knew what else.
This was the very early days of experimenting with LSD in the,
in the early 1950s, west was one of the premier researchers in last,
but he was still new to it. Um, he had actually come out of,
he had first gained national attention for being one of four or five doctors who
treated Korean prisoners of war,
who were returned to the United States after they had made confessions of
spraying the Korean countryside with illegal biological weapons, um,
the United States, so that we don't use that that's against the Geneva codes.
Um, and these guys were brainwashed by the, the north Korean,
Chinese Soviets. Uh,
so when they were brought back after the war west and four other psychiatrists
were assigned to deprogram them, what a lot of researchers believe,
um, is that they actually
brainwash them into thinking they had been brainwashed by the Koreans where they
actually were telling the truth because there's a lot of evidence has come out
recently. It's five, six years ago that we did use these weapons in Korea.
Oh boy. Double cross. Yeah.